Scaffold proteins can both facilitate or inhibit signaling processes in a
concentration-dependent manner [REF]. This dual function can be achieved,
since scaffolds expressed at lower or optimal levels can enforce juxtaposition
of interacting molecular species, whereas scaffold over-expression can titrate
these molecular species away from each other. This dose dependence suggests
that uneven spatial distribution of scaffold molecules within a cell can
result in a spatially inhomogeneous signaling outcome, which in turn might
lead to polarization of cellular functions regulated by the signaling. If
these functions are associated with re-organization of cellular cytoskeleton,
oriented cell growth or migration may ensue. Indeed, within the context of the
yeast mating response, inhomogeneous distribution of a scaffold protein within
a cell responding to a pheromone gradient can result in a spatially graded
distribution of the associated MAPK signaling [REF]. Furthermore, global
variation of the scaffold levels within the same signaling system has the
predicted biphasic effect on downstream gene regulation [REF]. However, it is
not clear whether the scaffold-mediated intracellular gradient of MAPK
triggered in this response is causally related to the directed cell growth
associated with the mating response [REF]. Furthermore, in spite of these
suggestive findings in budding yeast, the existence of similar cell
polarization mechanisms and their possible relationship to directed migration
response in other cell types, e.g., in mammalian migratory cells, remains
unclear. 

A ubiquitous mammalian scaffold molecule implicated in the control of
chemotactic responses is beta-arrestin. Beta-arrestins are members of the
arrestin protein family initially identified as the blockers of the G-protein
coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling and promoters of the receptor
internalization [REF]. However, subsequent research also implicated these
proteins in classical scaffolding functions, by demonstrating their
association with and regulation of multiple signaling pathways [REF].
Furthermore, a recent study demonstrated that beta-arrestin-2 function is
essential for directed migration of HEK293 cells expressing Angiotensin II
(AngII) receptor (AT1aR) in sharp gradients of AngII. This result however,
left open multiple questions about the putative beta-arresin role in control
of chemotaxis.  Does it enforce chemotaxis as a classical scaffold, by
promoting polarization of signaling and cytoskeletal components, as proposed
above, or is its role in regulation of chemotaxis purely permissive? Is the
signaling pathway scaffolding or receptor internalization function of
beta-arrestin primary in this response?  Moreover, it is unclear if the
distribution of beta-arrestin within the cells exposed to AngII gradient is
spatially inhomogeneous, and if so, whether the polarization of the signaling
can be compromised in very shallow AngII concentration gradients?  Answering
these questions may reveal a previously unappreciated new mechanism of cell
polarization and chemotactic response. 

In this study, using a combination of diverse experimental techniques and
modeling, we set out to ascertain the importance of beta-arrestin in
chemotactic regulation and to investigate the underlying mechanisms. We found
that the control of chemotactic behavior by beta-arrestin depends on its
ability to serve as a classical scaffold protein in the Erk1/2 MAPK(Erk)
signaling pathway, but also, surprisingly, that both receptor internalization
and signal scaffolding functions of beta-arrestin are critically important for
effective chemotaxis. Trafficking of internalized receptor complexes was
essential for amplification of shallow input gradients, whose direction was
decoded by signaling through the Erk pathway. Overexpression of
beta-arrestin-2 led to dramatic changes in cell migration behavior, including
conversion from chemo-attraction to chemo-repulsion. Overall, the interplay
between the scaffold expression, input dose and intracellular trafficking was
found to be critical in defining this new mechanism of cellular polarization
and chemotactic migration. 

RESULTS

The initial evidence for the importance of beta-arrestin in chemotactic
response to AngII gradients was obtained from trans-well experiments [REF].
However, these assays do not always have unambiguous interpretation, as the
results can depend on both migratory and invasive cell behavior. We therefore
first validated chemotactic behavior by direct monitoring of live cell
migration within a microfluidic device, whose design allowed for the analysis
of cell responses to diffusion based gradients [REF]. We indeed found that
HEK293 cells with exogenously expressed AT1aR displayed a pronounced
chemotactic behavior within shallow AngII gradients. We also observed that
A7r5 rat vascular smooth muscle cells endogenously expressing AngIIR displayed
a strong chemotactic response to AngII, supporting its function as an
effective natural chemoattractant. Increasing the value of the AngII gradient
led to stronger chemotactic attraction of HEK293 cells, the response that was
further amplified when the levels of beta-arresin were moderately
over-expressed. We also confirmed that siRNA based silencing of beta-arresin
expression completely eliminated chemotaxis, and that chemotaxis could occur
in the gradients of a biased AT1aR agonist, SII, and thus was beta-arrestin
dependent (????). Furthermore, we observed that chemotactic response to SII
was surprisingly significantly stronger that that to AngII, as evidenced by
normalization of the results to account for different receptor affinity of
these two compounds. These results suggested that the bone fide chemotactic
response to AngII was indeed beta-arrestin dependent. 

How does beta-arrestin-2 mediated signaling control the chemotactic response?
To analyze the underlying molecular mechanisms in greater detail, we first
exposed the cells to spatially homogenous step-wise elevations of AngII
concentration.  We used several live cell probes to follow different stages of
the AngII triggered signal propagation. We found that, at both AngII doses
examined, beta-arrestin displayed transient translocation to the membrane,
followed by persistent cytosolic localization in complex with AT1aR within
internalized vesicles. The complex formation was reported by the … FRET
signal… We confirmed that prevention of endocytosis and resulting vesicle
formation led to inhibition of the chemotactic response suggesting that
internalized AT1aR-beta-arrestin complex was the functionally important form
of beta-arrestin in chemotactic signaling. This result further suggested that
the signaling species activated by the complex would be associated with
internalized vesicles. We found that Erk1/2 (ERK) activity was upregulated
contemporaneously with AT1aR-beta-arrestin complex formation.  This MAPK
underwent strong, dose dependent activation followed by incomplete adaptation
to the steady levels dependent on the AngII dose. Inhibition of Erk activation
was found to inhibit chemotactic response, suggesting its functional
significance in the beta-arrestin regulated chemotactic behavior. Addition of
AngII also triggered strong and transient translocation of actin to the plasma
membrane and associated expansion of the membrane. This translocation was
AngII dose dependent. 

When average time-dependent responses of the distinct signaling species
analyzed above were normalized to the time of AngII addition and overlaid on
the same graph, it became clear that Erk activation closely followed the
kinetics of AT1aR- beta-arrestin complex formation, prior to its partial
adaptation. The kinetics of actin response was hypersensitive to the signal
addition, displaying both rapid activation and rapid adaptation.
Overexpression of actin within the cells led to an increased stress fiber
formation and cell spreading. In such cells, the higher surface to volume
ratio was predicted to favor a more rapid translocation of beta- arrestin to
the plasma membrane, which was indeed confirmed. This, in turn was associated
with a correspondingly faster translocation of actin to the plasma membrane,
further suggesting causative link between beta-arrestin activation and
actin-based morphology change. In summary, these results suggested that AngII
triggers a sequence of signaling events ultimately leading to both dose
dependent Erk activation and actin-dependent morphological change, with both
outcomes potentially relevant to promoting cell migration. 

Since beta-arrestin can regulate signaling events by both controlling receptor
internalization and directly scaffolding signaling pathways, beta-arrestin
overexpression can potentially affect signaling outcome through either or both
of these processes. We thus explored, at several distinct doses of AngII,
beta-arrestin expression in amounts leading to strong impairment of cell
migration directionality, would negatively affect both receptor
internalization and Erk signaling. Indeed, we found that, for all doses of
AngII, high scaffold levels dramatically decreased beta-arrestin-enriched
vesicle formation. The intermediate levels of beta-arrestin expression led to
a progressive increase in vesicle formation, as the dose of AngII increased.
Erk signaling was also negatively affected by high levels of beta-arrestin
expression. However, it displayed a more complex dependence on the AngII dose.
For both beta-arrestin levels analyzed, the dose dependencies were biphasic,
with the maximum levels reached at different AngII concentration values. These
complex cellular responses called for development of a computational model
capable of accounting for the experimental results obtained so far, and of
predicting cell behaviors under different circumstances, particularly under
the AngII gradient stimulation. 

The model illustrated in the schematic??? was based on the idea that
beta-arrestin levels can control the signaling outputs by biphasically
affecting both receptor internalization at the plasma membrane and Erk
activation in the vesicles.  Furthermore, it was assumed that Erk activity
could display a degree of scaffold- independent activity in the cytosol. The
resulting model was partially based on our prior model of the
scaffold-mediated MAPK signaling, with the important modification to account
for several cellular compartments: plasma membrane, cytosol and vesicles. The
model, after parameter adjustment could successfully account for several
experimental datasets described above [????]. We next extended the model by
introducing spatial dimensionality into simulations and attempting to predict
cell responses to gradients of AngII. Although the model could account for
some degree of cell polarization, the differences between the signaling
activities in the rear and front portions of the cell tended to be very weak
in shallow AngII gradients. This suggested that an amplification mechanism may
be present in the signaling network such that it might amplify shallow input
gradients into stronger polarized intracellular signaling responses. We next
examined this prediction and modified the model to account for a possible
amplification mechanism.  When examined in AngII gradients, the intracellular
distributions of internalized receptor, beta-arrestin and Erk activity
displayed strong asymmetry, which exceeded the asymmetry expected based on the
AngII input gradient alone. This result suggested that indeed, there was a
mechanism to amplify the difference between the signaling activities in the
front and the rear of the cells. Since the beta- arrestin localization and Erk
activity were confined to the vesicles, one immediate possibility for an
amplification mechanisms was that not only vesicle formation (through
internalization) was affected by the asymmetry of the input, but also vesicle
recycling, with a greater degree of recycling on the side of the cell opposite
to the side with a greater degree of internalization. To test this idea we
first noted that vesicle trafficking, but not vesicle formation, was
microtubule-dependent.  Inhibition of microtubules with nocodazole, a
microtublule disrupting agent, also progressively reduced amplification of
beta-arrestin polarization in the AngII gradient. This result not only
confirmed potential role of microtubule-based vesicle trafficking in gradient
amplification, but raised the question of whether this process can be linked
to vesicle recycling. Previously, it has been determined that a small GTP-ase
Rab11 could control endosome recycling in a microtubule dependent fashion.
Furthermore, Rab11 has been associated with various forms of in vivo cell
migration [REF]. We found that, in cells exposed to AngII gradients, Rab11
translocated to the back of the cell, consistent with possible gradient
induced polarization of vesicle recycling. Inhibition of Rab11 by
overexpression of its dominant negative form indeed resulted in the loss of
signal amplification and biased cell migration, further supporting its
functionality in gradient sensing. We thus modified the model to account for
the asymmetric vesicle formation and recycling occurring in the
beta-arrestin-2 and Rab11 manner, respectively.  The model made several
important predictions that we sought to validate experimentally. First, it
predicted that, in line with beta-arrestin playing a role of a classical
scaffold molecule, different levels of scaffold expression are expected to
result in biphasic changes in both Erk activity and the corresponding bias in
chemotactic response. Furthermore, the optimal levels of the scaffold for
these two responses were predicted to be shifted with respect to each other,
so that chemotactic bias would peak at a lower scaffold level relative to the
scaffold level optimizing Erk activation. This was indeed observed in the
experiments, when clones expressing different levels of beta-arrestin were
analyzed. The model predicted and experiments confirmed that microtubule
disruption by nocodazole can lead to a relative increase in the Erk activity,
due to accumulation of intracellular vesicles. 

Variation of scaffold levels and of average local concentrations of AngII was
predicted to lead to complex chemotactic responses. An important assumption
here, stemming from the earlier experimental results, was that the vesicle
formation was positively regulated by AngII levels, promoting beta-arrestin
recruitment.  For the level of the scaffold, optimal for chemotaxis, the model
predicted and experiment confirmed that the response would be attractive at
all levels of local AngII, with a weak or no dependence on the AngII dose. On
the other hand, for the highly overexpressed beta-arrestin levels, the model
and experiment showed that cells can switch from chemo-attraction to
chemo-repulsion at the low AngII concentrations, and switch again to
chemo-attraction at higher AngII levels. The explanation suggested by the
model was that the repulsive response was due to the inhibition of Erk
signaling at high scaffold levels in the vesicles, thus maximizing Erk
signaling on the side of the cell exposed to lower rather than higher AngII
inputs.  On the other hand, the switch back to attraction was associated with
an additional effect of decreased vesicle formation when scaffold and AngII
input levels were both high, thus negating the effect of the scaffold-based
suppression of Erk signaling from the vesicles. The model therefore predicted
that this ‘double negative’ effect of the scaffold over-expression at high
AngII levels should be compensated by a greater vesicle retention, e.g., by
inhibiting microtublule-mediated vesicle trafficking and recycling. Indeed,
treatment of cells containing over-expressed beta-arrestin-2 with nocodazole
led to uniform repulsive response at all AngII concentration levels. 

The model was also successful in predicting other properties of the cell
migration response, including the dependence of the chemotactic bias on the
gradient value [Fig.??]. Overall, the consistency between the model and
experiment strongly suggested that the model correctly captures the essence of
the chemotactic response controlled by beta-arrestin. Surprisingly, both the
role of beta-arrestin in the scaffolding signaling species within the vesicles
and its role in vesicles trafficking (along with the reciprocal role of
Rab11), were critically important for effective chemotaxis in shallow ligand
gradients. The vesicle trafficking resulted in amplification of extracellular
ligand asymmetry, which was then interpreted by the cells according to the
combination of the input strength and scaffold expression, and resulting
strongly asymmetric Erk activity, cell polarization and directional migration. 

Discussion points

NB!!! Need to link to actin and RSK better p38 role (possibly related to the
trans-well assay), A new mechanism Can help explain the role of Rab11 in other
systems A different role for vesicle trafficking than usually assumed Is
flexible Natural way to get both chemoattraction and chemorepulsion Not clear
how Rab11 distribution is controlled but we have excluded certain
possibilities Can be at play in many G-protein and beta-arrestin dependent
systems, including possibly GF signaling
